4.1 ARDIUNO SOFTWARE:
Arduino
 is an open-source electronics platform based on easy-to-use hardware and software. 
Arduino
 boards
 are able to read inputs - light on a sensor, a finger on a button, or a Twitter message - and turn it into an output - activating a motor, turning on an LED, publishing something online. You can tell your board what to do by sending a set of instructions to the microcontroller on the board. To do so you use the 
Arduino
 programming language
 (based on 
Wiring
), and 
the 
Arduino
 Software (IDE)
, based on 
Processing
.
Over the years 
Arduino
 has been the brain of thousands of projects, from everyday objects to complex scientific instruments. A worldwide community of makers - students, hobbyists, artists, programmers, and professionals - has gathered around this open-source platform, their contributions have added up to an incredible amount of 
accessible knowledge
 that can be of great help to novices and experts alike.
Arduino
 was born at the 
Ivrea
 Interaction Design Institute as an easy tool for fast prototyping, aimed at students without a background in electronics and programming. As soon as it reached a wider community, the 
Arduino
 board started changing to adapt to new needs and challenges, differentiating its offer from simple 8-bit boards to products for 
IoT
 applications, wearable, 3D printing, and embedded environments. All 
Arduino
 boards are completely open-source, empowering users to build them independently and eventually adapt them to their particular needs. 
The
software
, too, is open-source, and it is growing through the contributions of users worldwide.
Why 
Arduino
?
 Thanks to its simple and accessible user experience, 
Arduino
 has been used in thousands of different projects and applications. The 
Arduino
 software is easy-to-use for beginners, yet flexible enough for advanced users. It runs on Mac, Windows, and Linux. Teachers and students use it to build low cost scientific instruments, to prove chemistry and physics principles, or to get started with programming and robotics. Designers and architects build interactive prototypes, musicians and artists use it for installations and to experiment with new musical instruments. Makers, of course, use it to build many of the projects exhibited at the Maker Faire, for example. 
Arduino
 is a key tool to learn new things. Anyone - children, hobbyists, artists, programmers - can start tinkering just following the step by step instructions of a kit, or sharing ideas online with other members of the 
Arduino
 community.
There are many other microcontrollers and microcontroller platforms available for physical computing. Parallax Basic Stamp, 
Netmedia's
 BX-24, 
Phidgets
, MIT's 
Handyboard
, and many others offer similar functionality. All of these tools take the 
messy details of microcontroller programming and wrap it up in an easy-to-use package. 
Arduino
 also simplifies the process of working with microcontrollers, but it offers some advantage for teachers, students, and interested amateurs over other systems:
Cross-platform - The 
Arduino
 Software (IDE) runs on Windows, Macintosh OSX, and Linux operating systems. Most microcontroller systems are limited to Windows.
Simple, clear programming environment - The 
Arduino
 Software (IDE) is easy-to-use for beginners, yet flexible enough for advanced users to take advantage of as well. For teachers, it's conveniently based on the Processing programming environment, so students learning to program in that environment will be familiar with how the 
Arduino
 IDE works.
Open source and extensible software - The 
Arduino
 software is published as open source tools, available for extension by experienced programmers. The language can be expanded through C++ libraries, and people wanting to understand the technical details can make the leap from 
Arduino
 to the AVR C programming language on which it's based. Similarly, you can add AVR-C code directly into your 
Arduino
 programs if you want to.
Open source and extensible hardware - The plans of the 
Arduino
 boards are published under a Creative Commons license, so experienced circuit designers can make their own version of the module, extending it and improving it. Even relatively inexperienced users can build the 
breadboard version of the module
 in order to understand how it works and save money.
Writing Sketches
Programs written using 
Arduino
 Software (IDE) are called sketches. These sketches are written in the text editor and are saved with the file extension .
ino
. The editor has features for cutting/pasting and for searching/replacing text. The message area gives feedback while saving and exporting and also displays errors. The console displays text output by the 
Arduino
 Software (IDE), including complete error messages and other information. The bottom 
righthand
 corner of the window displays the configured board and serial port. The toolbar buttons allow you to verify and upload programs, create, open, and save sketches, and open the serial monitor.
FILE
New
 
Creates a new instance of the editor, with the bare minimum structure of a sketch already in place.
Open
 
Allows 
to load
 a sketch file browsing through the computer drives and folders.
Open Recent
 
Provides a short list of the most recent sketches, ready to be opened.
Sketchbook
 
Shows
 the current sketches within the sketchbook folder structure; clicking on any name opens the corresponding sketch in a new editor instance.
Examples
 
Any
 example provided by the 
Arduino
 Software (IDE) or library shows up in this menu item. All the examples are structured in a tree that allows easy access by topic or library.
Close
 
Closes
 the instance of the 
Arduino
 Software from which it is clicked.
Save
 
Saves
 the sketch with the current name. If the file hasn't been named before, a name will be provided in a "Save as
.."
 window.
Save as...
 
Allows 
to save
 the current sketch with a different name.
Page Setup
 
It shows the Page Setup window for printing.
Print
 
Sends
 the current sketch to the printer according to the settings defined in Page Setup.
Preferences
 
Opens the Preferences window where some settings of the IDE may be customized, as the language of the IDE interface.
Quit
 
Closes all IDE windows. The same sketches open when Quit was chosen will be automatically reopened the next time you start the IDE.
EDIT
Undo/Redo
 
Goes back of one or more steps you did while editing; when you go back, you may go forward with Redo.
Cut
 
Removes the selected text from the editor and places it into the clipboard.
Copy
 
Duplicates the selected text in the editor and places it into the clipboard.
Copy for Forum
 
Copies the code of your sketch to the clipboard in a form suitable for posting to the forum, complete with syntax coloring.
Copy as HTML
 
Copies the code of your sketch to the clipboard as HTML, suitable for embedding in web pages.
Paste
 
Puts
 the contents of the clipboard at the cursor position, in the editor.
Select All
 
Selects and highlights the whole content of the editor.
Comment/Uncomment
 
Puts or removes the // comment marker at the beginning of each selected line.
Increase/Decrease Indent
 
Adds or subtracts a space at the beginning of each selected line, moving the text one space on the right or eliminating a space at the beginning.
Find
 
Opens the Find and Replace window where you can specify text to search inside the current sketch according to several options.
Find Next
 
Highlights the next occurrence - if any - of the string specified as the search item in the Find window, relative to the cursor position.
Find Previous
 
Highlights the previous occurrence - if any - of the string specified as the search item in the Find window relative to the cursor position.
SKETCH
Verify/Compile
 
Checks your sketch for errors compiling it; it will report memory usage for code and variables in the console area.
Upload
 
Compiles and loads the binary file onto the configured board through the configured Port.
Upload Using Programmer
 
This will overwrite the 
bootloader
 on the board; you will need to use Tools > Burn 
Bootloader
 to restore it and be able to Upload to USB serial port again. However, it allows you to use the full capacity of the Flash memory for your sketch. Please note that this command will NOT burn the fuses. To do so 
a 
Tools
 -> Burn 
Bootloader
 command must be executed.
Export Compiled Binary
 
Saves a .hex file that may be kept as archive or sent to the board using other tools.
Show Sketch Folder
 
Opens the current sketch folder.
Include Library
 
Adds a library to your sketch by inserting #include statements at the start of your code. For more details, 
see
libraries
 below. Additionally, from this menu item you can access the Library Manager and import new libraries from .zip files.
Add File...
 
Adds a source file to the sketch (it will be copied from its current location). The new file appears in a new tab in the sketch window. Files can be removed from the sketch using the tab menu accessible clicking on the small triangle icon below the serial monitor one on the right side o the toolbar.
TOOLS
Auto Format
 
This
 formats your code nicely: i.e. indents it so that opening and closing curly braces line up, and that the statements inside curly braces are indented more.
Archive Sketch
 
Archives a copy of the current sketch in .zip format. The archive is placed in the same directory as the sketch.
Fix Encoding & Reload
 
Fixes possible discrepancies between the editor char map encoding and other operating systems char maps.
Serial Monitor
 
Opens the serial monitor window and initiates the exchange of data with any connected board on the currently selected Port. This usually resets the board, if the board supports Reset over serial port opening.
Board
 
Select the board that you're using. See below for 
descriptions of the various boards
.
Port
 
This
 menu contains all the serial devices (real or virtual) on your machine. It should automatically refresh every time you open the top-level tools menu.
Programmer
 
For
 selecting a 
harware
 programmer when programming a board or chip and not using the onboard USB-serial connection. Normally you won't need this, but if you're 
burning a 
bootloader
 to a new microcontroller, you will use this.
Burn 
Bootloader
 
The
 items in this menu allow you to burn a 
bootloader
 onto the microcontroller on an 
Arduino
 board. This is not required for normal use of an 
Arduino
 or 
Genuino
 
board but is useful if you purchase 
a new 
ATmega
 microcontroller (which normally come
 without a 
bootloader
). Ensure that you've selected the correct board from the Boards menu before burning the 
bootloader
 on the target board. This command also set the right fuses.
HELP
Here you find easy access to a number of documents that come with the 
Arduino
 Software (IDE). You have access to Getting Started, Reference, this guide to the IDE and other documents locally, without an internet connection. The documents are a local copy of the online ones and may link back to our online website.
FIND IN REFERENCE
 
This is the only interactive function of the Help menu: it directly selects the relevant page in the local copy of the Reference for the function or command under the cursor.
SKETCH BOOK
The 
Arduino
 Software (IDE) uses the concept of a sketchbook: a standard place to store your programs (or sketches). The sketches in your sketchbook can be opened from the File > Sketchbook menu or from the Open button on the toolbar. The first time you run the 
Arduino
 software, it will automatically create a directory for your sketchbook. You can view or change the location of the sketchbook location from with the Preferences dialog.
Beginning with version 1.0, files are saved with 
a
 .
ino
 file extension. Previous versions use the .
pde
 extension. You may still open .
pde
 named files in version 1.0 and later, the software will automatically rename the extension to .
ino
.
Tabs, Multiple Files, and Compilation
Allows you to manage sketches with more than one file (each of which appears in its own tab). These can be normal 
Arduino
 code files (no visible extension), C files (.c extension), C++ files (.
cpp
), or header files (.h).
UPLOADING
Before uploading your sketch, you need to select the correct items from the Tools > Board and Tools > Port menus. 
The
boards
 are described below. On the Mac, the serial port is probably something like /dev/tty.usbmodem241 (for 
an
 Uno or Mega2560 or Leonardo) or /dev/tty.usbserial-1B1 (for a 
Duemilanove
 or earlier USB board), or/dev/tty.USA19QW1b1P1.1 (for a serial board connected with a 
Keyspan
 USB-to-Serial adapter). On Windows, it's probably COM1 or COM2 (for a serial board) or COM4, COM5, COM7, or higher (for a USB board) - to find out, you look for USB serial device in the 
ports
 section of the Windows Device Manager. On Linux, it should be /dev/
ttyACMx
 ,/
dev/
ttyUSBx
 or similar. Once you've selected the correct serial port and board, press the upload button in the toolbar or select the Upload item from the Sketch menu. Current 
Arduino
 boards will reset automatically and begin the upload. With older boards (pre-
Diecimila
) that lack auto-reset, you'll need to press the reset button on the board just before starting the upload. On most boards, you'll see the RX and TX LEDs blink as the sketch is uploaded. The 
Arduino
 Software (IDE) will display a message when the upload is complete, or show an error.
When you upload a sketch, you're using the 
Arduino
 
bootloader
, a small program that has been loaded on to the microcontroller on your board. It allows you to upload code without using any additional hardware. The 
bootloader
 is active for a few seconds when the board resets; then it starts whichever sketch was most recently uploaded to the microcontroller. The 
bootloader
 will blink the on-board (pin 13) LED when it starts (i.e. when the board resets).
LIBRARIES
Libraries provide extra functionality for use in sketches, e.g. working with hardware or manipulating data. 
To use a library in a sketch, select it from the Sketch > Import Library menu.
 This will insert one or more #
include
 statements at the top of the sketch and compile the library with your sketch. Because libraries are uploaded to the board with your sketch, they increase the amount of space it takes up. If a sketch no longer needs a library, simply delete its #
includestatements
 from the top of your code.
There is a 
list of libraries
 in the reference. Some libraries are included with the 
Arduino
 software. Others can be downloaded from a variety of sources or through the Library Manager. Starting with version 1.0.5 of the IDE, you do can import a library from a zip file and use it in an open sketch. See these 
instructions for installing a third-party library
.
To write your own library, see 
this tutorial
.
Third-Party Hardware
Support for third-party hardware can be added to the hardware directory of your sketchbook directory. Platforms installed there may include board definitions 
(which appear in the board menu), core libraries, 
bootloaders
, and programmer definitions. To install, create the hardware directory, then unzip the third-party platform into its own sub-directory. (Don't use "
arduino
" as the sub-directory name or you'll override the built-in 
Arduino
 platform.) To uninstall, simply delete its directory.
For details on creating packages for third-party hardware, see the 
Arduino
 IDE 1.5 3rd party Hardware specification
.
SERIAL MONITOR
This displays serial sent from the 
Arduino
 or 
Genuino
 board over USB or serial connector. To send data to the board, enter text and click on the "send" button or press enter. Choose the baud rate from the drop-down menu that matches the rate passed to 
Serial.begin
 in your sketch. Note that on Windows, Mac or Linux the board will reset (it will rerun your sketch) when you connect with the serial monitor. Please note that the Serial Monitor does not process control characters; if your sketch needs a complete management of the serial communication with control characters, you can use an external terminal program and connect it to the COM port assigned to your 
Arduino
 board.
You can also talk to the board from Processing, Flash, 
MaxMSP
, etc (see the 
interfacing page
 for details).